Go ahead and start talking in interviews.
Has a 15 second protective device on this thing.
Sometimes works, sometimes doesn't. Okay, would
you explain then please your interest in the
Louisiana, Missouri plant? Yes. I came to
Morgantown in 1946. The station here was
established under the Synthetic Liquid Fuels
Act. We occupied space on campus at West Virginia
University. And then Congress authorized a
permanent station for Morgantown. That must have
been about 1950, 51. My memory is fuzzy on the
dates. It was formally dedicated the station on
College Ferry Road in 1954. I came to study gas
purification, purification of synthesis gas.
I don't know when the Louisiana, Missouri plant
was authorized to be constructed.
It probably was the late 40s. You probably got this
information from telling me that you didn't even
know about that. But my job at the time was to review
the German purification technology, and more
specifically, to improve upon it. And our job was
to obtain on the bench scale and on a small planet
scale data that could be used in Louisiana,
Missouri. Although they had committed
themselves to the German purification process as
such, The information that we were to supply to
them was to improve the operation of the plant at
Louisiana, Missouri.
The only time I've been at Louisiana, Missouri was
during the dedication of the plant.
As I recall, their purification consisted of a
liquid scrubber followed by a process called the
soda iron process, the function of it being to
remove the organic sulfur compounds, the liquid
scrubber to remove hydrogen sulfide and carbon
dioxide. And it may have been that between the
liquid scrubber and the soda iron, they had an
activated carbon vessel to remove gum formers,
which would otherwise interfere with the
operation of the soda iron. You must realize that,
I think this is correct, that all German
gasification processes were at atmospheric
pressure, essentially, as was their gas
purification. The Louisiana plant, the gas
purification, was designed to operate under
pressure. In fact, the first pressure
gasification of coal in the world was done here in
Morgantown back in 1946, 1947. So all of my gas
purification work was under 300 pounds pressure.
Since they were committed to the soda iron
process, I didn't feel that there was any need to
look at that in the laboratory, since they were
going to operate the plant anyway and get the data
out there. So, we looked at, well the Germans had
what they call Alkazdik,
that's A-L-K-A-Z-I-D. and an alkazid M. I don't
recall the chemical composition, but one was to
selectively take out the hydrogen sulfide, and
one was to remove simultaneously hydrogen
sulfide and carbon dioxide. And the need for
taking out hydrogen sulfide selectively is that
when you regenerate your liquid solution, you get
the hydrogen sulfide and carbon dioxide off as an
off-gas. And to process that in what was called the
class process for converting hydrogen sulfide to
elemental sulfur, you had to do something with the
hydrogen sulfide. You needed a high
concentration of hydrogen sulfide with respect
to carbon dioxide. So therefore, you had to
selectively absorb hydrogen sulfide rather than
carbon dioxide. But we didn't get involved in any
of the German liquid scrubbing agents. We looked
at those available in the United States, and the
ones we concentrated on were those made by Gerger
Corporation, and they were called mono, di, and
triethanolamine. The triethanolamine was the
selective agent, so we concentrated on that,
although we looked at the other two also. And the
Louisiana recommendation, Louisiana,
Missouri, was to use triethanolamine as their
liquid scrubber. In the meantime, we were looking
for better ways of removing organic sulfur rather
than the soda iron process, because I had priced
the cost of the soda iron as prepared in the United
States, and it was an enormous figure. Of course,
during the war, the Germans would not Economics
was no problem. There was no concern. So, as I
recall, they used this sort of iron. When it became
spent, they simply threw it away. So it was way too
expensive. So we looked at other methods, and
we looked at activated carbon under pressure as an
absorbent for organic sulfur compounds. Now
based on the German data, their most difficult
organic sulfur compound to remove was thiophene.
So we started out on the assumption that thiophene
would be our more difficult, most difficult thing
to remove, compound to remove. So we tried
activated carbon and it was an excellent
adsorbent for thiophene. Let me interrupt for a
moment. How would thiophene have gotten into the
gas, except as a catalyst, as part of the catalyst?
Or from the coal. From the coal itself? Yeah. I see.
Most of the organic sulfur compounds in coal are of
a thiophenic nature. Oh, I didn't know that. Yes.
Most of the organic sulfur compounds are tied up as
thiophenes.
And the simplest of these thiophenes is thiophene
per se. four carbons, four hydrogens, and a sulfur
anyway. Yeah, C4H4S. So we were very elated when we
found activated carbon responded so beautifully
to thiophene and also that the activated carbon
when it became spent could be very easily be
regenerated or be vivified simply by heating it
with a hot inert gas. And you've got back the full
capacity of it for subsequent use.
Concurrent with that, we thought we would look at
methods for removing the hydrogen sulfide and
organic sulfur simultaneously so that we can
eliminate the scrubbing system, which was used
for taking out hydrogen sulfide. So we had at that
time a consultant called Dr. Huff, who had
developed this catalyst, which consisted of the
oxides of copper, chromium, and vanadium. And we
studied that.
It absorbed the hydrogen sulfide 100%. There was
nothing in the F1 gas. It reduced the organic
sulfur,
the usual forms, carbon oxisulfide, carbon
disulfide. They were captains. But the thiophene
was too refractory. It didn't touch the thiophene
at all. But it did work beautifully. And then when
it started passing sulfur, then we simply
regenerated it with air and got it back to the
oxides. Then when it was put back on stream, these
oxides just by the nature of them, were reduced by
the synthesis gas to the element. And I think at the
time,
we utilized 10% of the synthesis gas for the
reduction step, just the way it worked. Well, this
became uneconomical then, so we dropped that. In
fact, we dropped the idea of removing hydrogen
sulfide and ordinary sulfur simultaneously.
About that time, the gasifier on campus at
Beachhurst Avenue was put into operation, and as
whereas we were operating under slagging
conditions, and whereas the German processes
were non-slagging, And therefore, in order to
operate under slagging conditions, it required a
much higher temperature. I think the island gas
was something like 2,400 degrees Fahrenheit. So
when we went to analyze the gas to find out what
organic sulfur compounds were there,
unfortunately, now, there was no thiophene. The
temperatures obviously cracked it down to
hydrogen sulfide and methane, perhaps. I don't
know. And the only organic sulfur compound
present in the gas was that as carbonyl sulfide,
COS. This was of some concern because whereas
thiophene is a liquid at ambient temperatures,
COS is a gas. So we were concerned that the
activated carbon could effectively take out a
gaseous organic sulfur compound. So we
concentrated our efforts on that and found that it
didn't work very nicely. I think I recall a rough
cost estimate of something like the activated
carbon cycle was something like two-tenths of a
cent per thousand cubic feet. It was extremely
cheap. We investigated a wide variety of
charcoals, those made from coconut shale, which
back then was selling for something like $1.25 a
pound, I think. And then we also looked at some That
one that was prepared from coal,
supplied by somebody on Nimble Island in
Pittsburgh, Columbia Carbon Company, I believe.
But anyway, it was relatively inexpensive, quite
inexpensive compared to the coconut shell, and it
worked almost as well, so we concentrated on that.
And have these processes been adopted by IGT,
let's say, in manufacturing high gas in Chicago?
Comper's company used the activated carbon for
absorbing, adsorbing organic sulfur. I can't
tell you where the plant was. But
the synthane plant At Brewston, the coal
gasification plant uses activated carbon for
taking out organic sulfur compounds. At
Louisiana and Missouri, I think this is correct,
they operated the soda iron.
They developed a hot spot, and I think the vessel
ruptured. Did McGee or Kattel mention this? They
said the vessel ruptured. Yeah, and I don't think
it was put back into operation. because by that
time we had found that activated carbon could do
what soda iron could do. So our recommendation was
simply a liquid scrubber, triethanolamine, and
of course the liquid scrubber, you cannot operate
it to remove all the hydrogen sulfide. It becomes
uneconomical. In fact, I don't think you could
reduce the vapor pressure sufficient that you
could take it all out anyway. And we did various
efficiency studies to determine the optimum
hydrogen sulfide to be left in the gas leaving the
liquid scrubber and this came out to be about 25
grains per 100 cubic feet so this we removed by the
inexpensive classical method the old iron oxide
box it's simply iron oxide on wood shavings and it
cleans it right up beautifully so we recommended
the liquid scrubber followed by iron oxide
followed by activated carbon and this gets your
total sulfur down
probably certainly less than a tenth of a grain per
hundred cubic feet. And of course we were
interested in
sulfur even lower than that because at the time we
had a cooperative agreement with, I think it was
Southern Natural Gas, to study the effective
sulfur on the activity of a nickel catalyst for
converting hydrogen and carbon monoxide to
methane. So we purified the gas over a wide range of
sulfur concentrations. established the life of
the catalyst with respect to the emits sulfur
concentration. So we were interested in getting
down as far as we could. I think the specifications
for Fischer-Tropsch at the time was something
like a tenth of a grain per 100 cubic feet of total
sulfur, and that's what we were shooting at. Of
course, we preferred lower because nickel
catalyst is much more prone to be poisoned by
sulfur than the Fischer-Tropsch catalyst,
either the iron or the cobalt. So that's
about the extent. As I say, the unfortunate thing
is that I don't think there are any data on the
purification at Louisiana, Missouri, with the
exception of one paper. by a man by the name of
Wilmot, and I think this was limited to the liquid
scrubber. And he's located now in Venice,
Florida, if I'm correct? He left here and went to
Australia, to retire in Australia, and then he
came back, and I don't know where he is. But as far as
I, to my knowledge, that's the only
piece of literature on the Louisiana gas
purification system. Which, as I told you at the
front, is unfortunate, but that's just the way it
is. I get the impression that the view of the German
documents gave you a substantial edge. The
thiophene, for instance, you knew immediately
where the problem was going to lie. Which didn't
materialize, of course.
Would you say that the German documents were of any
substantial
help? Not as far as gas purification is concerned,
since we didn't adopt any of it. And again, since we
were operating under pressure, and all there was
was an atmospheric pressure, it didn't apply. And
of course, the liquid scrubbing agents that they
used, we were not interested in because they
weren't manufactured in this country. And from
the data I saw, they were in no way superior to the
ethanol amines.
So I can't really say no that they were of that much
help. In fact, they were too expensive.
They were helpful in this respect as far as
establishing specifications for the purified
gas with respect to the Fischer-Trump synthesis.
They were in that respect helpful. But as far as the
technology is concerned, I can't say it was much
help.
How long were you working on purification gas?
Two, three years? From 1946 to 1955. 1946 to 55. So
you really worked through the closure of the
Louisiana, Missouri plant? Yes. Did there seem to
be...
Did the personnel of your own mind seem to be
agitated that the Louisiana, Missouri plant
closed? I can't speak for others, but I certainly
was. I mean, I had devoted...
Up until that time, five years of research to be
utilized in Louisiana, Missouri, I never was. So
it was a discomfort to me. And,
well, it's just unfortunate. But at the time,
well, when this station was, when we occupied
space on campus, there were two stations in the
Pittsburgh area. one on Forbes Street in the
Oakland area of Pittsburgh, and one at Brewston,
Pennsylvania. And when we tried to get a permanent
station established in Morgantown, there was a
lot of hassle among the two stations, between the
two stations in Pittsburgh, feeling it was
unnecessary for a third center to be established
within a distance of 75 miles.
But we were established primarily as a coal
gasification center, whereas Brewston was
primarily coal hydrogenation. And it remains
that way pretty much today, that way. But anyway,
we did get the station here in Morgantown. And I
recall that when the Louisiana, Missouri plant
was brought up, It was strongly opposed by Dr.
Storch, who was the head of the Brewston station at
the time. Dr. Storch was a real scientist and more
or less like fundamental research in addition to
the small pilot scale work that we're doing in
Brewston. And I think it was his opinion that we
were going to too large of a scale.
Then in 1952, I'm sure this is a coincidence, but in
1952, with the change of the administration,
there was a massive change in the personnel in the
Washington office, and this Dr. Storch then
became the head in Washington. But I say I think
it's a mere coincidence that Louisiana was closed
at the time that he went to Washington. But as I say,
he did oppose the construction of the plant, but no
one man, after it had gone along that long of a
period of time, could be influential in closing it
down. I just think it happened to be a coincidence.
Why do you think it closed down? Well, as I was
telling Dr. Kramer on the phone, I really don't
know. No one talked about it.
I think that... Based on cost estimates, which I'm
not familiar with, you're more familiar with this
than I am, I think it was becoming more or less
competitive with crude petroleum. And
whether the oil lobby had anything to do with it, I
just don't know. But I have my feelings. As I was
telling Dr. Kramer on the phone, at that time, the
petroleum industry wouldn't even look at the coal
industry. They were absolutely enemies, so to
speak, completely divorced of each other. And
then, as you know how things have turned out, I
don't know how much of the coal now is controlled by
those trolleys and such.
But it's unfortunate that it happened that way,
but as I told also Dr. Kramer, I don't think we'd be
in the situation we are today if that plant had been
allowed to continue to operate. What did you do
after you stopped experimenting with gas? At that
time,
they had developed at the Denver, Colorado
station, I believe it was, one of the Colorado
stations, a process that they call low
temperature carbonization of coal.
As opposed to coke oven operation that operates
something like 2,000 degrees Fahrenheit, low
temperature carbonization operates about 950
degrees Fahrenheit. Therefore, the tars that
evolve from the coal, whereas they are cracked in
the coke oven to make gas, they come out as a tar
liquid in the low temperature carbonization. So
they put up a plant, Alcoa, in conjunction with the
Texas Power Light Company, put up a low
temperature carbonization plant in Texas.
Rockdale, Texas, I believe.
And I suppose it's hindsight. They didn't know
what to do with the tar.
You couldn't burn it for its fuel value.
Otherwise, that wouldn't be enough to defray the
cost of the expense of carbonizing coal. And the
purpose of carbonizing the coal was to get a char
that you could generate power with in a
conventional boiler. So you had to have a profit on
this tar, at least to defray the expenses of
converting the coal into the char. So we looked at
it as a source of chemicals. And we worked on that
for approximately 10 years. The upshot of that was
that at the time there was a big hassle about
biodegradable detergents and we knew that
biodegradable detergents could be made by
reacting benzene with a long chain olefin with the
double bond on the last carbon. Fortunately, this
material from Texas, the tar we were working with
was from malignite coal, and it had about 12% of
this type of olefin. So we extracted these and made
biodegradable detergents. That was one of our
products. And then we made carbon black, carbon
electrodes,
phthalic and malic anhydrides. But anyway, when
we found out the yields of all these things, as I
recall, we figured out that a 2 million ton a year
carbonization plant, the market would be
completely flooded with these chemicals.
Completely flooded. So after we found out that, we
discontinued that. And then we... Why would that
be a disadvantage? No. Flood the market. You
didn't have the consumer. Oh, I see. One small
plant like that, and you produce enough
biodegradable detergents to the country. So all
interest was lost in that, whether it'll be, oh, we
know that it is a source of jet fuels to try to get a
premium value product out of it. Probably, if it
ever comes back into being again, it'll be a source
of liquid fuels. In fact, we did some work on that.
And it converts very nicely to a synthetic
petroleum. So if it ever, if it ever revived, it'll
probably be the end product that you can use for it.
Then we made a complete flip-flop after getting
all this organic chemistry. We completely got
involved in inorganic chemistry by looking at the
minerals of coal, the mineralogy of coal, and
specifically the effect that they have on the
various conversion products, processes.
Unfortunately, we didn't get to complete that to
my satisfaction. I wanted to find out what effect
these minerals in a variety of coals with
different mineral constituents, what effect
this would have on the rate of gasification, what
effect it would have on our service of catalyst and
coal hydrogenation. This work, I think, is
currently being done at Penn State now under Dr.
Gidham. And I think it's a very fruitful area of
research.
I feel that in the future, when a person buys coal,
that the specifications that now exist, such as
the BTU value, the ash content, the sulfur
content, will actually, there will be limits on
certain mineral constituents. so much cadmium,
so much mercury, because these do volatilize
after the atmosphere. So I think that the
mineralogy of coal will get involved in the future
specifications of coal. And indeed, some coals
that we looked at, one particular one had more tin
in it than some of the tin ores that they're
processing to make tin. And one had more copper in
it than some of the copper ores that they're
processing. So anyway, based on that mineralogy
work we did,
sort of serendipity I guess, we got a contract with
NASA to look at the lunar samples. So we had lunar
rocks from Apollo 11, 12, 14, and 15. So of course we
got a lot of publicity out of that. And then when
that was completed... I just have a curiosity.
What is lunar rock like? I'll never in my life meet
somebody else who would send a piece of slag.
Lava. In fact, the composition is very close to
volcanic lava. But... We put it on display out here
at the station for the public, and we never saw
their faces drop so much when they saw it. And then
we had some under the microscope, and there you
could really see the various minerals and the
various colors and the purples and the pinks and
the reds and what have you. So that sort of helped it
along as far as the public was concerned. Was there
anything unusual about that lava, that slab? It's
the same kind of thing that you could find anywhere
else.
No carbon, no metal. Just a mixture of calcium,
magnesium, silicon oxides, iron. There was a
higher percentage of titanium than we find here on
Earth, but not that much different. Not that much
different. I'll never meet anyone again in my life
who examined more rocks, I'm sure. Well, you
should, from Texas, go over to Houston.
And then we...
got involved in some co-hybridization work on a
very nominal scale.
And then where did you go? Right here. Right, okay.
That ticket was then retirement. Right. Okay.
Have any more questions you'd like to ask Dr.
Cranford? I'd like to inquire, you mentioned to me
you had a short exchange with Secretary Warren.
Yes. On the closing of the plant. Yes. He, uh, he was
in Morgantown, visiting the station, shortly
after we moved to the interior, I think, and we had
lunch at a restaurant in town. And, uh, I don't know
how the subject was brought up, but I mentioned
that Louisiana was very planned, and that, uh, I
thought it was a pity that it was shut down. And
that's when he made the remark that, do you think
the government starts research programs and
then, uh, doesn't get sufficient information
from them. And I said, well, on this particular
case, that was the case.
But the thing that also disturbs me is that we're
putting up more and more of these plants. In all my
reading of the literature, I don't see anybody
referring or using any references to the
Louisiana, Missouri plan.